docs: Describe how notifications work on the server (#1572)
CommunitySolidServer/CommunitySolidServer: documentation/markdown/usage/notifications.md

# Receiving notifications

A CSS instance can be configured to support [Solid notifications](https://solid.github.io/notifications/protocol).
These can be used to track changes on the server.
There are no specific requirements on the type of notifications a Solid server should support,
so on this page we'll describe the notification types supported by CSS,
and how to make use of the different ways supported to receive notifications.

## Discovering subscription services

The CSS only supports discovering the notification subscription services through the storage description resource.

> This can be found by doing a HEAD request on any resource in your pod and looking for the Link header

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This can be found by doing a `HEAD` request on any resource in your pod and looking for the `Link` header
```

with the `http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/terms#storageDescription` relationship.

For example, when hosting the server on localhost with port 3000, the result is:

> > `Link: <http://localhost:3000/.well-known/solid>; rel="http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/terms#storageDescription"`

Reviewer: ~~~suggestion
```
Link: <http://localhost:3000/.well-known/solid>; rel="http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/terms#storageDescription"
```
~~~

Doing a GET to `http://localhost:3000/.well-known/solid` then gives the following result (simplified for readability):

```turtle
@prefix notify: <http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/notifications#>.

<http://localhost:3000/.well-known/solid> a <http://www.w3.org/ns/pim/space#Storage>;
    notify:subscription <http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebSocketChannel2023/>,               
                        <http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebHookSubscription2021/>.
<http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebSocketChannel2023/> notify:channelType notify:WebSocketChannel2023;
    notify:feature notify:accept, notify:endAt, notify:rate, notify:startAt, notify:state.
    <http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebSocketChannel2023/> notify:channelType notify:WebHookSubscription2021;
    notify:feature notify:accept, notify:endAt, notify:rate, notify:startAt, notify:state.
```

> This says that there are 2 subscription services available that can be used for notifications and where to find them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This says that there are two available subscription services that can be used for notifications and where to find them.
```

Note that these discovery requests also support content-negotiation, so you could ask for JSON-LD if you prefer.

> Currently, this JSON-LD will not match the examples from the notification specification though.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, however, this JSON-LD will not match the examples from the notification specification.
```

The above tells us where to send subscriptions and which features are supported for those services.

> You subscribe to a channel by POSTing a JSON-LD document to the subscription services.
> There are some small differences on what this document needs to look like depending on the channel type,
> so these will be discussed below.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You subscribe to a channel by `POST`ing a JSON-LD document to the subscription services.
Depending on the channel type, there are some small differences in what this document needs to look like,
which will be discussed below.
```

> The subscription request needs to be a request authenticated using Solid-OIDC.
> The server will check if you have Read permissions on the resource you want to listen to.
> Requests without Read permission will be rejected.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Subscription requests need to be authenticated using Solid-OIDC.
The server will check whether you have `Read` permission on the resource you want to listen to.
Requests without `Read` permission will be rejected.
```

## Notification channel types

There currently are up to 2 supported ways to get notifications in CSS, depending on your configuration:
the notification channel types [WebSocketChannel2023](https://solid.github.io/notifications/websocket-channel-2023)
and [WebHookSubscription2021](https://github.com/solid/notifications/blob/main/webhook-subscription-2021.md).
The latter specification has been deprecated and will be replaced
by a newer WebHook implementation once that specification is published.
The practical differences will be minor though.

### WebSockets

To subscribe to the `http://localhost:3000/foo` resource using WebSockets,
you send the following JSON-LD document to the server, using an authenticated POST request,
to `http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebSocketChannel2023/`:

```json
{
  "@context": ["https://www.w3.org/ns/solid/notification/v1"],
  "type": "WebSocketChannel2023",
  "topic": "http://localhost:3000/foo"
}
```

> If you have Read permissions, the server will reply will look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you have `Read` permissions, the server's reply will look like this:
```

```json
{
  "@context": [ "https://www.w3.org/ns/solid/notification/v1" ],
  "id": "http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebSocketChannel2023/dea6f614-08ab-4cc1-bbca-5dece0afb1e2",
  "type": "WebSocketChannel2023",
  "topic": "http://localhost:3000/foo",
  "receiveFrom": "ws://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebSocketChannel2023/?auth=http%3A%2F%2Flocalhost%3A3000%2F.notifications%2FWebSocketChannel2023%2Fdea6f614-08ab-4cc1-bbca-5dece0afb1e2"
}
```

The most important field is `receiveFrom`.
This field tells you the WebSocket you need to connect to, after which you will start receiving notifications.
In JavaScript this can be done using the WebSocket object, e.g.:

```javascript
const ws = new WebSocket(receiveFrom);
ws.on('message', (notification) => console.log(notification));
```

### WebHooks

> Similarly to the WebSocket subscription, below is an example JSON-LD
> that needs to be sent to `http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebHookSubscription2021/`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Similar to the WebSocket subscription, below is sample JSON-LD
that would be sent to `http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebHookSubscription2021/`:
```

```json
{
  "@context": [ "https://www.w3.org/ns/solid/notification/v1" ],
  "type": "WebHookSubscription2021",
  "topic": "http://localhost:3000/foo",
  "target": "https://example.com/webhook"
}
```

> Notice that this document has an additional `target` field.
> This is the WebHook URL of your server, the URL where you want the notifications to be sent to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that this document has an additional `target` field.
This is the WebHook URL of your server, the URL to which you want the notifications to be sent.
```

The response would then be something like:

```json
{
  "@context": [ "https://www.w3.org/ns/solid/notification/v1" ],
  "id": "http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebHookSubscription2021/eeaf2c17-699a-4e53-8355-e91d13807e5f",
  "type": "WebHookSubscription2021",
  "topic": "http://localhost:3000/foo",
  "target": "https://example.com/webhook",
  "unsubscribe_endpoint": "http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebHookSubscription2021/eeaf2c17-699a-4e53-8355-e91d13807e5f"
}
```

> The new field here is the `unsubscribe_endpoint` field.
> The created notification channel can be removed by sending a DELETE request to the URL found there,
> thereby stopping the notifications.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `unsubscribe_endpoint` field is new here.
Once created, the notification channel can be removed and notifications stopped
by sending a `DELETE` request to the URL found in that field.
```

## Notification format

Below is an example notification that would be sent when a resource changes:

```json
{
  "@context": [
    "https://www.w3.org/ns/activitystreams",
    "https://www.w3.org/ns/solid/notification/v1"
  ],
  "id": "urn:123456:http://example.com/foo",
  "type": "Update",
  "object": "http://localhost:3000/foo",
  "state": "987654",
  "published": "2023-02-09T15:08:12.345Z"
}
```

A notification contains the following fields:

> * **id**: A unique identifier for this notification.
> * **type**: What happened to the notification. We discuss the possible values below.
> * **object**: The resource that changed.
> * **state**: An identifier indicating the state of the resource.
>               This corresponds to the ETag value you get when doing a request on the resource itself.
> * **published**: When this change occurred.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **`id`**: A unique identifier for this notification.
* **`type`**: What happened to trigger the notification. We discuss the possible values below.
* **`object`**: The resource that changed.
* **`state`**: An identifier indicating the state of the resource.
              This corresponds to the `ETag` value you get when doing a request on the resource itself.
* **`published`**: When this change occurred.
```

### Notification types

> CSS supports 5 different notification types that the client can receive.
> The format of the notification can slightly change depending on the type.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CSS supports five different notification types that the client can receive.
The format of the notification can change slightly, depending on the type.
```

Resource notification types:

> * **Create**: When the resource is created.
> * **Update**: When the existing resource is changed.
> * **Delete**: When the resource is deleted. Does not have a `state` field.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **`Create`**: When the resource is created.
* **`Update`**: When the existing resource is changed.
* **`Delete`**: When the resource is deleted. Does not have a `state` field.
```

Additionally, when listening to a container,

> there are 2 extra notifications that are sent out when the contents of the container change.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there are two extra notifications that are sent out when the contents of the container change.
```

For these notifications, the `object` fields references the resource that was added or removed,
while the new `target` field references the container itself.

> * **Add**: When a new resource is added to the container.
> * **Remove**: When a resource is removed from the container.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **`Add`**: When a new resource is added to the container.
* **`Remove`**: When a resource is removed from the container.
```

## Features

The Solid notification specification describes several extra features that can be supported by notification channels.
By default, these are all supported on the channels of a CSS instance,
as can be seen in the descriptions returned by the server above.
Each feature can be enabled by adding a field to the JSON-LD you send during subscription.
The available fields are:

> * **startAt**: An `xsd:dateTime` describing when you want to notifications to start.
>                  No notifications will be sent on this channel before this time.
> * **endAt**: An `xsd:dateTime` describing when the notifications should stop.
>                The channel will be destroyed at that time and no more notifications will be sent.
> * **state**: A string corresponding to the `state` string of a resource notification.
>                In case this value differs from the actual state of the resource,
>                a notification will be sent out immediately to inform the client that its stored state is outdated.
> * **rate**: An `xsd:duration` indicating how often notifications can be sent out.
>               A new notification will only be sent out after this much time passed since the previous notification.
> * **accept**: A description of the content-type in which the client would want to receive the notifications.
>                 Expects the same values as an `Accept` HTTP header.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* **`startAt`**: An `xsd:dateTime` describing when you want notifications to start.
                 No notifications will be sent on this channel before this time.
* **`endAt`**: An `xsd:dateTime` describing when you want notifications to stop.
               The channel will be destroyed at that time, and no more notifications will be sent.
* **`state`**: A string corresponding to the `state` string of a resource notification.
               If this value differs from the actual state of the resource,
               a notification will be sent out immediately to inform the client that its stored state is outdated.
* **`rate`**: An `xsd:duration` indicating how often notifications can be sent out.
              A new notification will only be sent out after this much time has passed since the previous notification.
* **`accept`**: A description of the `content-type(s)` in which the client would want to receive the notifications.
                Expects the same values as an `Accept` HTTP header.
```

# Receiving notifications

A CSS instance can be configured to support
[Solid notifications](https://solidproject.org/TR/2022/notifications-protocol-20221231).
These can be used to track changes on the server.
There are no specific requirements on the type of notifications a Solid server should support,
so on this page we'll describe the notification types supported by CSS,
and how to make use of the different ways supported to receive notifications.

## Discovering subscription services

> The CSS only supports discovering the notification subscription services through the storage description resource.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
CSS only supports discovering the notification subscription services through the storage description resource.
```

This can be found by doing a `HEAD` request on any resource in your pod and looking for the `Link` header
with the `http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/terms#storageDescription` relationship.

For example, when hosting the server on localhost with port 3000, the result is:

```bash
Link: <http://localhost:3000/.well-known/solid>; rel="http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/terms#storageDescription"
```

Doing a GET to `http://localhost:3000/.well-known/solid` then gives the following result (simplified for readability):

```turtle
@prefix notify: <http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/notifications#>.

> <http://localhost:3000/.well-known/solid> a <http://www.w3.org/ns/pim/space#Storage>;
>     notify:subscription <http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebSocketChannel2023/>,               
>                         <http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebHookSubscription2021/>.
> <http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebSocketChannel2023/> notify:channelType notify:WebSocketChannel2023;
>     notify:feature notify:accept, notify:endAt, notify:rate, notify:startAt, notify:state.
>     <http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebSocketChannel2023/> notify:channelType notify:WebHookSubscription2021;
>     notify:feature notify:accept, notify:endAt, notify:rate, notify:startAt, notify:state.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<http://localhost:3000/.well-known/solid>
    a                   <http://www.w3.org/ns/pim/space#Storage> ;
    notify:subscription <http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebSocketChannel2023/> ,
                        <http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebHookSubscription2021/> .
<http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebSocketChannel2023/>
    notify:channelType  notify:WebSocketChannel2023 ;
    notify:feature      notify:accept ,
                        notify:endAt ,
                        notify:rate ,
                        notify:startAt ,
                        notify:state .
<http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebSocketChannel2023/>
    notify:channelType  notify:WebHookSubscription2021;
    notify:feature      notify:accept ,
                        notify:endAt ,
                        notify:rate ,
                        notify:startAt ,
                        notify:state .
```

```

This says that there are two available subscription services that can be used for notifications and where to find them.
Note that these discovery requests also support content-negotiation, so you could ask for JSON-LD if you prefer.
Currently, however, this JSON-LD will not match the examples from the notification specification.

The above tells us where to send subscriptions and which features are supported for those services.
You subscribe to a channel by `POST`ing a JSON-LD document to the subscription services.

> There are some small differences on what this document needs to look like depending on the channel type,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are some small differences in the structure of these documents, depending on the channel type,
```

which will be discussed below.

Subscription requests need to be authenticated using Solid-OIDC.
The server will check whether you have `Read` permission on the resource you want to listen to.
Requests without `Read` permission will be rejected.

## Notification channel types

There are currently up to two supported ways to get notifications in CSS, depending on your configuration:

> the notification channel types [`WebSocketChannel2023`](https://solid.github.io/notifications/websocket-channel-2023)
> and [`WebHookSubscription2021`](https://github.com/solid/notifications/blob/main/webhook-subscription-2021.md).
> _**Note:** The latter specification has been deprecated, and will be replaced

Reviewer: ```suggestion
the notification channel types [`WebSocketChannel2023`](https://solid.github.io/notifications/websocket-channel-2023);
and [`WebHookSubscription2021`](https://github.com/solid/notifications/blob/main/webhook-subscription-2021.md).
_**Note:** `WebHookSubscription2021` has been deprecated, and will be replaced
```

  "topic": "http://localhost:3000/foo",
  "receiveFrom": "ws://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebSocketChannel2023/?auth=http%3A%2F%2Flocalhost%3A3000%2F.notifications%2FWebSocketChannel2023%2Fdea6f614-08ab-4cc1-bbca-5dece0afb1e2"
}
```

The most important field is `receiveFrom`.
This field tells you the WebSocket to which you need to connect, through which you will start receiving notifications.
In JavaScript, this can be done using the WebSocket object, such as:

```javascript
const ws = new WebSocket(receiveFrom);
ws.on('message', (notification) => console.log(notification));
```

### WebHooks

Similar to the WebSocket subscription, below is sample JSON-LD
that would be sent to `http://localhost:3000/.notifications/WebHookSubscription2021/`:

```json
{
  "@context": [ "https://www.w3.org/ns/solid/notification/v1" ],
  "type": "http://www.w3.org/ns/solid/notifications#WebHookSubscription2021",
  "topic": "http://localhost:3000/foo",
  "target": "https://example.com/webhook"
}
```

Note that this document has an additional `target` field.
This is the WebHook URL of your server, the URL to which you want the notifications to be sent.

> The response would then be something like:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The response would then be something like this:
```
